(upbeat music)
Hi folks we gonna start learning about Gatsby querying.
There's two different types of queries that live in Gatsby.
There are page queries and there are static queries.
The difference between a page query and a static query
is that a page query can accept variables
and can only be done on an actual page in your pages folder.
And a static query can be done anywhere you want,
however they are they cannot be dynamic,
meaning they cannot take variables
and so allow me to explain here.
If we go to the finished version that we have here,
we are going, if we go to the pizzas page,
we get a list of all of the pizzas that we have,
but we also want the ability to filter
based on a specific topping.
And I don't wanna like code this page twice
I don't wanna code the pieces page.
And then I don't wanna code a toppings page
just a little bit different.
So what I wanna do here is on the pizzas page,
I'm gonna query all of the pizzas that meet
that have this topping, or if there is no topping specified,
I'm just gonna query all of the, the pizzas that we have.
Now, we'll go a little bit more into that in the future,
but it's really important to note
that if you wanna have variables in your query,
meaning that you wanna pipe in mushrooms,
it has to happen at a page level.
That's a bit of a limitation of Gatsby,
just I guess, because of the way that it works,
how it all needs to be generated upfront.
So let's get into page queries.
And the way that you specify a page query is you just export
a query from the page and Gatsby is smart enough to say,
"Oh!, that's a query I better go and get that data for you
when we run the build"
and then it will pass it to our page component.
So we go here and we'll just say, export const,
a query is equal to graphql, and then we'll use back text.
So a couple of things need to happen right here.
So this variable right here,
I always thought that that was like special.
You will also see people using page query
and it doesn't matter what you call it.
It just matters that if you are exporting something
that is a graphql query,
it will then turn that into data for you.
This graphql here, we may be can auto import it.
There we go.
It's imported as graphql from Gatsby.
And then we also, I can get rid of this layout,
cause we're no longer using that.
Then inside of here,
that's where we're going to go ahead
and write all of our queries.
So if we open up the local host, underscore, underscore,
underscore underscore graphql
you remember that we wrote this query here.
It says allSanityPizza.
And then for each node, we want the name,
the ID the price of slug and all of that good data.
So when here we can go ahead and start writing our queries.
So we type query.
Now we are gonna come back and modify this to take
variables, which is the filter for the pizza.
But in our case,
we are not going to be doing that right now.
You can also name this query called like pizza query.
You may see, and I might do this myself.
People not do it
just because it's not necessary to add it,
but you can pop a name on it.
It's kind of like an anonymous function
versus the name function.
Then inside of here, we will query all of our sanity pizza
So say allSanityPizza.
Now I, you saw me put parentheses on the end there.
We don't need them just yet.
We will add them when we need to filter
for the different topics that we have.
And then for each sanity pizza, we need the node.
And this is probably easier just to go into your graphql
explorer here, or graphical
and write this query inside of here,
because you get all of the, the IntelliSense here.
It will try to auto complete it.
And also if you're having trouble with a query,
like, let's say, you accidentally forgot the S on nodes.
Like I just did.
And then I want the name of the pizza.
Let's try run this query so you would select all of this,
not the surrounding backticks
and just paste it in here and you run it.
And it gives you an error,
cannot read node on sanity pizza connection.
Did you mean nodes?
Yes, I did.
So I'd go and add an S here.
I had an S here.
Run it, and there we go see it's now showing up.
What else do we want for here?
We want the ID of the pizza.
We want the slug of the pizza, which has a current property.
We also want the toppings on each of those pizza
and for each of the toppings,
you want the topping ID
and the name of that topping.
And then finally, and this is where we get into images.
We'll cross that in a second, but we'll query it right now.
We say image
cause that's our field
and normally you think like, Oh I just get the image
and it gives me a URL,
but in our case, we're going to be using something
called Gatsby image,
which we'll go into in just a second.
But for now we just have to write this ourselves.
So image, asset, nested inside of that,
we want fluid parenthesis max width 400.
Again, this will makes sense once we get into Gatsby image,
and then we use something in graphql called the fragment.
So inside of this fluid,
there's gonna be something,
there's gonna be like a don't type this
there's gonna be like a base 64.
There's also gonna be like an asseturl.
There's gonna be a width there's gonna be a height.
And so often you're gonna be querying all of these fields
for the same thing.
And in graphql, when you query the same thing
over and over and over again,
it's easier to not just have to type it,
but to stick it inside of a fragment.
And a fragment is just a collection of fields that we want.
That's kind of a weird thing about graphql.
As you can't just like ask for like give me everything
that you have.
You have to specifically ask for every field that you want.
And if that's feeling a little bit cumbersome to you,
you need to stick it in a fragment.
And in our case,
the fragments come with Gatsby
So it's ...GatsbySanityImageFluid
So all this is called upper camel case.
So capital G on and then capital letters
on all of the letters.
Now, one kind of weird thing about that
is now, if you were to take this query
and paste it into here,
we get an unknown fragment Gatsby sanity fluid.
And that's because I'm not sure why
this doesn't work that way,
I guess, just because Gatsby adds this fragment
as part of the build,
but it's not available in graphical,
it seems like maybe they could fix that.
But if that was the case, then you'd have to, I don't know,
Here we go you can just select some,
you can just change it to SFC and that will see it gives you
an actual URL of the actual pizza,
but we need a lot more fields than just the SFC.
So we'll be using that.
Okay, so give that a Save now and now go back
to your page and open up react dev tools.
And we want to find our pizzas page component.
This is why it's important to name your page components
because we can go to the react dev tools
and then just search for the pizzas page component
which is here we pizzas page right here.
Ooh! Hot export it pizzas page (laughs)
That's funny so hot export
it means that that's hot reloading.
That's the quick reload,
but you should see in here
that we now have in the props of that component,
we have a data prop,
and then it says allSanityPizza.
And then inside of that, we have our nodes.
And then finally we have both of our pizzas
accessible to us.
One little thing I like to do
is I don't like to type all sanity pizza
or all sanity people or anything like that.
I like to just name them what they are pizzas.
And that's especially true
if you were to ever like switch CMSs,
you might have to update your queries anyways.
But I don't like the name of this.
So you can rename a query in graphql
by doing this pizzas colon.
And what that does is it renames it
from allSanityPizza just to pizzas.
And now look at that I just refreshed,
now, we see pizzas instead of allSanityPizzas.
Okay, so now the question is how do you access that in here?
Well, we can go into here
and we could say props
and we could just simply just console.log the props
that are available to us.
And this is a little bit weird.
You might be asking like,
okay, well like how does this get from here to there?
Like we're not passing it or anything.
And that's a little bit of Gatsby magic
Gatsby will recognize that you have exported a graphql
component from the page,
and then it will run it behind the scenes
and then stick it into props.data.
So let's just console log props.
See what we're working with here.
I like to just refresh the page,
clear out any garbage in there.
And oh! I think I cleared it out too early.
Let's refresh it, there we go.
There's our props.
And inside of that,
you see stuff about where we are
a little navigate function, but most importantly,
we have props.data.pizzas.
So we can say console log props.data.pizzas.
And now when it runs, we just get our pizzas directly.
So what a lot of people will do is they'll destructure that
one or two levels deep as sort of as deep as you want.
So you could destructure that into data.
And then we don't need to console log props, that data,
it's just data.pizzas.
There we go that's still works,
and you could go even further.
And destructure that into pizzas directly.
I'm not gonna do that
just cause like I'm not a hot shot.
That seems a little unnecessary to me.
And it gets a little hard to read.
So I just like the destructure one level deep.
I'll probably (laughs) contradict myself
later in this course,
but that's all I'm feeling right now.
And let's just console log the data.
Beautiful, okay.
So, that's working so far.
Now, we want to figure out
how to start to display our pizzas on the page.
Well, we can start doing something like this.
Let's go into this paragraph and say,
Hey there are, I can go in here and say
data.pizzas.length pizzas.
There are, Oh! There our pizzas (laughs)
What did we do?
Alright, data.pizzas.
Oh! There we go.
So that's a bit of a problem it's not pizzas.
It's nodes inside of that.
So data.pizzas.nodes.length
and there we go there are two pizzas.
You may also do this up here.
You could just say const pizzas
is equal to data.pizzas.nodes.
And then we can just go ahead
and have this nice clean variable called pizzas.
So again, you could destructure in the object
or do it right before you return your JSX.
Both of them work really well.
There we go, the hey there are two pieces.
So we now see, we have the data.
Now you might be saying like, okay,
Wes, like what about loading state, right?
Like you refresh the page
and just works like in your other courses,
we always had to do this whole song
and dance of if it's loading and then also check,
is there data and in Gatsby you just go ahead and use it.
And that's the beauty of Gatsby
is that there's never a loading state in Gatsby
because it's all prebuilt.
So before this page even renders,
the pizzas will be there very similar
to how server side rendering works.
It just happens at build time rather than render time.
So we don't have to check if there's loading
and throw up spinner or something like that,
because the pizzas will always be there
because this page will not be rendered
until it's there and in build time,
we'll build it,
the pizzas will be there
and then we'll ship it off to the server.
Okay, cool.
Now, we wanna build another component that we'll go ahead
and display all of the pizzas that we have.
We could loop over the pieces right inside of here,
but I always like to keep my pages as thin as possible,
where you have your queries
and then you just kind of block out the pieces
that you want there.
And then we'll use another component
to actually display the pizzas.
So let's go into our components folder here
and make a new file.
And we'll call that capital P PizzaList.js.
I'm going to use import react from react,
export default function, pizzaList.
And then we're just return paragraph list of pizzas.
And we'll go into here and try to use that component.
So now I'm gonna get rid of this paragraph tag
and we will just say PizzaList component,
and then we will try to auto import that sucker.
Boom! Okay.
So if that didn't work for you import pizzaList
from we go up a level into components
and then grab it from the piece of list directory,
give that a Save and pizzaList is not defined.
Just needed a refresh.
Sometimes you gotta we'll call that,
give it a hot supper.
So sometimes you just gotta give it a hot supper
and refresh the whole thing.
So it works.
Alright, so now we have this.
Now we wanna get the pizzas,
which is here into that component.
So we'll pass that down via props.
So we'll go here,
we'll say pizzas is equal to curly bracket pizzas.
Then we can go into this pizzaList
and destructure that prop pizzas, is that what we call it?
Yep.
And then let's just do one more check to say,
there are pizzas.length zas.
There we go,
Looking good, okay.
Now, what we wanna do is to loop over each of those pizzas
and display each one that we have.
So I'm gonna go and remove this
and let's just give ourselves a div for now.
And then we'll do curly brackets and we take our pizzas
and you map over it.
So if you wanna loop over something in react,
you use a map function.
And then from each pizza that you have,
we get singular pizza.
So for each pizza that we have take an individual pizza,
and then from that return,
a paragraph tag that says pizza,
and there we go, so we have two pizzas.
So we get two paragraph tags that show us
that we each have a pizza, okay.
Then we could replace that.
We could say like pizza.name,
there we go veggie delight and master pizza.
But what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna make another
component that is used for displaying a single pizza.
So anytime I have this whole like grid of items
and then singular items,
I'll almost always make a separate component
for the grid and then another component
for the individual one.
So let's go (clicking) let's go above it.
So I'll say function single pizza.
And you'll notice I'm not exporting this one.
And the reason behind that
is because I'm not actually gonna be using this
anywhere else throughout the website.
If I was, I could simply just export it
and that would make it accessible.
And I could use that anywhere else I wanted on the site.
But in my case, we're just gonna be using it right here.
So I'm gonna keep it in the same file.
You might also be asking Wes,
like why didn't you create like one function per component?
Like, why don't you just create another component
for that single pizza,
And into that I say, that's too confusing.
If I'm just gonna use it here,
then I'm gonna put it in the same file.
And then if I find myself saying like,
Oh! Man, like I'm using this all over the website.
I better put it in its own component.
But in this case, I always opt for putting it all
in one file and then chunking it out if I need to,
rather than by default making a million files,
cause that's no way to live your life.
Or maybe it is you do you, yeah?
It's a free world out there.
What do we've got here?
Single pizza, okay.
And that will take in a pizza prop, okay.
And then from here, let's just return.
Let's do this first return a paragraph tag
with the pizza.name inside of it.
And we can go down here
and replace this paragraph tag
with a single pizza component.
And then that needs to be passed the singular pizza.
And that should work, give it a hot supper refresh.
And here we go it's working now.
It will yell at us about a key
let's take a look here.
Warning each child in a list
should have a unique key prop, okay.
Now, that's good.
So anytime you map over something,
you must give the individual item a unique key,
so react can keep track of it and update it quickly.
And that's why we queried the ID of the pizza.
Cause that is a perfect use case for an ID in a key.
So I would say key is equal to pizza.id,
give it a Save, hot supper refresh
and all kinds of other garbage in here.
Hopefully this gets cleaned up soon,
but there's no actual error coming from our things.
And the way you can tell if that's an error,
is if the actual error that you're getting here is coming
from one of your components
versus some junk in inside of Gatsby, okay.
Alright, let's work on the single pizza here.
So instead of returning a paragraph tag,
we'll return a div
inside of that, we'll have a link to that pizza.
So a link to, and this is how we generate
the individual pizza URL.
So we'll link to forward slash pizza
forward slash and we're gonna interpolate.
So that's why we did this is a little bit confusing,
but if you wanna generate a slug,
you around here,
you use curly brackets backticks.
And then from there on out,
it's just a ESX template strings.
So we have to use dollar-sign, curly bracket
to interpolate things like the pizza.slug.current.
You may be saying like, Wes,
"How did you know that that was pizza.slug.current?"
Well, you could go to my components here.
And oh! It's given us grief about the link
we got to auto import that sucker.
There we go, important link from Gatsby
and let's look for a single pizza, here we go.
Let's see in here, we've got two single pizzas
and you see in the props, we have our slug.
And then it gives us the current value of the slug,
which is veggie-delight.
Now we can go inside of this link.
I hope my prettier auto closed it.
I gotta close it like that and put something inside of it.
I'm Inside of that,
let's give ourselves an h2 tag
where we put the pizza.name inside of it.
Here we go, Veggie delight, Master Pizza.
If we click on one of those, it doesn't work.
And that's because we haven't created
this veggie delight page yet.
In order to do this,
we're not gonna be creating a new page
in our pages folder for every single pizza.
Cause that would be millions of pizzas
or millions of pages,
but we will be dynamically creating those pages
in a future video.
Also what we want inside of here,
just for some CSS that's coming up.
I want you to take a span with a class of Mark
and then put the pizza.name inside of that.
That's just gonna be for some styling.
Look that we have you take a look here.
This little highlight here is a class of Mark.
Go back to the pizzas page, there we go.
See, that's showing up there.
Now below this h2 we wanna,
let's render out a list of the toppings that we have.
So we'll give ourselves a paragraph tag
and we'll take the pizza.toppings and we'll map over that.
So you could kick this out to a separate component,
but I don't think it's necessary given how small it is.
So a map over each topping,
and then this is an implicit return arrow function.
We will return the topping.name.
And you might be saying like Wes,
where's the like a paragraph tag
or where's the span around that?
Let me show you what we got here.
So give that a Save.
You'll see, Oh!Look at that,
mushrooms, onions, pepperoni mushrooms, onions bacon.
So what we did there is we simply just took
the list of toppings mapped over it
and returned just the topping name.
So let me show you an example here.
So let's look for a single pizza again, there we go.
And then we open up the pizza
and I believe that we can access this component.
If I click on it and go to our console,
we can type $r.
There we go, that gives us the component
that is currently selected in here.
And then if we look inside of there, do we have props,
good $r.props.pizza.
Okay, and then .toppings that gives us an array
of the toppings, but like, don't care about the ID.
I just want the name of it.
So it will say $r.pizza.toppings.map.
I'll say topping and we're just return
the topping.name and what that does
is returns just an Array of the toppings.
And then we can simply just run .join
on it with anything we want in between
in our case we'll just join those things together
with our divider here.
So in our case, we wanted to use a comma space
here we go nice little list.
So in our case, there's no need to loop over it
and wrap each one in a span.
So we could just do this where we map over it.
And then we use join comma space after.
Here we go, got all of our toppings showing up.
Cool, so I think that's enough for this video
and what we have left here yet is being able
to get the images showing up
on this page of the pizza.